Finding proper values of physical parameters in mathematical models is
often quite a challenge. While many has gotten away with using just
the mathematical symbols when doing science and engineering with pen
and paper, the modern world of numerical computing requires each
physical parameter to have a numerical value, otherwise one cannot get
started with the computations.  For example, in the simplest possible
transient heat conduction simulation, a case relevant for a real
physical material needs values for the heat capacity, the density, and
the heat conduction coefficient of the material. In addition, relevant
values must be chosen for initial and boundary temperatures as well as
the size of the material.  With a dimensionless mathematical model, as
explained in Chapter ref{sec:scale:diffu}, *no physical quantities*
need to be assigned (!). Not only is this a simplification of great
convenience, as one simulation is valid for any type of material, but
it also actually increases the understanding of the physical problem.

Scaling of differential equations is basically a simple mathematical
process, consisting of the chain rule for differentiation and some
algebra.  The *choice of scales*, however, is a non-trivial topic,
which may cause confusion among practitioners without extensive
experience with scaling.  How to choose scales is unfortunately not
well treated in the literature. Most of the times, authors just state
scales without proper motivation. The choice of scales is highly
problem-dependent and requires knowledge of the characteristic
features of the solution or the physics of the problem.  The present
book aims at explaining ``all nuts and bolts'' of the scaling
technique, including choice of scales, the algebra, the interpretation
of dimensionless parameters in scaled models, and how scaling impacts
software for solving differential equations.

Traditionally, scaling was mainly used to identify small parameters in
mathematical models, such that perturbation methods based on series
expansions in terms of the small parameters could be used as an
approximate solution method for differential equations.  Nowadays, the
greatest practical benefit of scaling is related to running numerical
simulations, since scaling greatly simplifies the choice of values for
the input data and makes the simulations results more widely
applicable.  The number of parameters in scaled models may be much
less than the number of physical parameters in the original model. The
parameters in scaled models are also dimensionless and express
*ratios* of physical effects rather than the levels of individual
effects.  Setting meaningful values of a few dimensionless numbers is
much easier than determining physically relevant values for the
original physical parameters.

Another great benefit of scaling is the physical insight that follows
from dimensionless parameters. Since physical effects enter the
problem through a few dimensionless groups, one can from these groups
see how different effects compete in their impact on the
solution. Ideally, a good physical understanding should provide the
same insight, but it is not always easy to ``think right'' and realize
how spatial and temporal scales interact with physical parameters.
This interaction becomes clear through the dimensionless numbers, and
such numbers are therefore a great help, especially for students, in
developing a correct physical understanding.

Since we have a special focus on scaling related to numerical
simulations, the book contains a lot of examples on how to program
with dimensionless differential equation models. Most numerical models
feature quantities with dimension, so we show in particular how to
utilize such existing models to solve the equations in the associated
scaled model.


Scaling is not a universal mathematical technique as the details
depend on the problem at hand. We therefore present scaling in a range
of specific applications, starting with simple ODEs, progressing with
basic PDEs, before attacking more complicated models, especially from
fluid mechanics.

Chapter ref{scale:dimunit} discusses units and how to make programs
that can automatically take care of unit conversion (the most frequent
mathematical mistake in industry and science?).  Section
ref{sec:scale:decay} introduces the mathematics of scaling and the
thinking about scales in a simple ODE problems modeling exponential
decay. The ideas are generalized to nonlinear ODEs and to systems of
ODEs.  Another ODE example on mechanical vibrations is treated in
Section ref{sec:scale:vib}, where we cover many different physical
contexts and different choices of scales.  Scaling the standard,
linear wave equation is the topic of Chapter ref{sec:scale:wave}, with
discussion of how boundary and initial conditions influence the choice
of scales.  Another PDE example, the diffusion equation, appears in
Chapter ref{sec:scale:diffu}. Here we progress from a simple linear
diffusion equation in 1D to the impact on scales of an oscillating
boundary condition. A nonlinear diffusion model as well
convection-diffusion PDEs are also discussed.  The final Chapter is
devoted to many famous PDEs arising from continuum models: elasticity,
viscous fluid flow, thermal convection, etc.

Especially experimental fluid mechanics is full of relations involving
dimensionless numbers such as the Grashof number and the Prandtl
number, but none of the textbooks the author has seen explain how
these numbers actually relate to dimensionless forms of the governing
equations. Consequently, this non-trivial topic is particularly
highlighted in the fluid mechanics examples.

The mathematics in the first two chapters is very gentle and requires
no more background than basic one-variable calculus and preferably
some knowledge of differential equation models. The next chapter
involves PDEs and assumes familiarity with basic models for wave
phenomena, diffusion, and combined convection-diffusion. The final
chapter is meant for readers with knowledge of the physics and
mathematics of continuum mechanical models. The mathematical level of
the text rises quickly after the first two chapters.

The pedagogy is to saturate the reader with a lot detailed examples to
provide an understanding for the topic, primarily because the choice
of scales depends on the problem at hand. One can also view the book
as a reference on how to scale many of the most important differential
equation models in physics.  For the simpler differential equations in
Chapters 2 and 3, we present computer code for many computational
examples, but the treatment of the advanced models in Chapter 4 is
more superficial to limit the size of that chapter.

The exercises are named either Exercise or Problem. The latter is
a stand-alone exercise without reference to the rest of the text, while
the former typically extends a topic in the text or refers to sections or
formulas in the text.

To conclude, the purpose of this book is to demystify the
technique and thinking about scaling differential equations and
motivate for always bringing a differential equation model on
dimensionless form before doing numerical simulations.

__Acknowledgments.__
The authors are thankful to Dr. Joakim Sundnes who greatly contributed to
the writing of Section ref{scale:bidomain}.

[hpl: Thank proof readers, Springer, others, ...]


# #if FORMAT in ("latex", "pdflatex")
\vspace{1cm}

\noindent
{\it Oslo, November 2015}  \hfill  {\it Hans Petter Langtangen, Geir K. Pedersen}
# #endif
